# Offline AI Solutions for Cosmetic Facial Analysis

Plastic surgeons seeking an **offline, image-only AI pipeline** for
facial analysis have a range of open-source solutions to consider. Key
tasks include **facial landmark detection**, **feature extraction**, and
**classification** of cosmetic issues (e.g. asymmetry, disproportion, or
features commonly targeted in surgery). Below we compare top approaches
that meet the requirements (fully local on a GTX 4090,
accuracy-over-speed, and mostly open-source). We then detail
implementation steps for the two best solutions, including model
sources, licenses, and hardware needs. Throughout, we note how each
system can improve over time with surgeon feedback.

## Comparison of Top Open-Source Approaches

### 1. **2D Landmark-Based Deep Learning Pipeline**

This approach uses high-accuracy facial landmark detection and classic
anthropometric analysis, optionally enhanced with deep learning
classifiers for specific features. It typically involves: **(a)**
detecting the face, **(b)** locating key facial landmarks, **(c)**
measuring symmetry/proportions from those landmarks, and **(d)**
classifying cosmetic issues based on those measurements or via learned
models.

-   **Face & Landmark Detection:** State-of-the-art open models like
    **RetinaFace** (for detection) and **FAN (Face Alignment Network)**
    or **MediaPipe Face Mesh** (for landmarks) can be used. RetinaFace
    is widely regarded as the most accurate open-source face
    detector[\[1\]](https://medium.com/pythons-gurus/what-is-the-best-face-detector-ab650d8c1225#:~:text=RetinaFace%20has%20a%20reputation%20for,results%20back%20up%20that%20reputation),
    providing reliable face bounding boxes. For landmark localization,
    deep networks achieve extremely precise results -- e.g. the
    **face-alignment** library (Bulat et al.) uses a CNN to predict 68
    or 3D landmarks and is billed as "the world\'s most accurate face
    alignment network". MediaPipe's Face Mesh is another option,
    predicting **468 3D landmarks in real time**
    on-device[\[2\]](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-3D-facial-surface-of-468-points-in-MediaPipe-Face-Mesh_fig4_367301766#:~:text=The%203D%20facial%20surface%20of,the%20need%20for%20a);
    it's fast and lightweight, though slightly less precise than heavy
    CNN models. All these tools are fully offline and GPU-accelerated.
    The face-alignment model (BSD-3 license) and MediaPipe (Apache 2.0)
    are open-source. The GTX 4090 can easily handle these models --
    RetinaFace (with \~27 million parameters) and FAN models will use
    only a few hundred MB of VRAM, so memory is
    ample[\[3\]](https://medium.com/pythons-gurus/what-is-the-best-face-detector-ab650d8c1225#:~:text=YuNet%20was%20developed%20with%20performance,enough%20for%20the%20larger%20models)[\[4\]](https://medium.com/pythons-gurus/what-is-the-best-face-detector-ab650d8c1225#:~:text=compared%20to%20the%2027%2C293%2C600%20that,enough%20for%20the%20larger%20models).

-   **Feature Extraction & Measurements:** With stable landmarks (e.g.
    eye corners, nose tip, jawline points), the system computes key
    facial metrics. This includes distances, ratios, and angles that
    plastic surgeons care about: e.g. interpupillary distance, facial
    thirds proportions, nose width to face width ratio, jaw symmetry
    (left vs. right), chin projection, nasolabial angle, cervicomental
    (chin-neck) angle, etc. Many classical proportions (often related to
    aesthetic "ideal" ratios) can be calculated directly. For instance,
    inner canthus distance vs. eye width, or symmetry scores (distance
    between left/right feature positions). Tools like **Dynaface**
    (Apache 2.0 license) demonstrate this approach -- it automatically
    places \~97 landmarks and outputs a variety of symmetry and facial
    measurements. These measurements are interpretable and can flag
    deviations (e.g. if one eye is 5mm higher than the other, or if nose
    length is longer than the ideal lower-third-of-face). Initially,
    threshold criteria for "issue" classification can be based on known
    aesthetic guidelines or surgeon input.

-   **Issue Classification:** Building on these features, the pipeline
    can classify cosmetic issues either through rule-based heuristics or
    machine learning. A simple approach is defining rules: e.g. "if
    facial midpoint to eye corner distance differs \>X% between left and
    right, flag asymmetry." Over time, these rules can be refined by
    surgeon feedback (adjusting thresholds or adding new measurements).
    A more advanced approach is training a **multi-label classifier**
    that takes the face (or the computed metrics) as input and outputs
    probabilities for issues (like "chin retrusion" or "nasal
    asymmetry"). Open datasets like **CelebA** (which label attributes
    such as "Big Nose", "Pointy Nose", "Big Lips", etc.) can provide a
    starting point for training models to recognize such features. For
    example, a deep CNN (ResNet or EfficientNet) pre-trained on CelebA
    attributes could be fine-tuned to detect cosmetic-relevant traits.
    The model could learn subtle cues beyond geometric ratios (like
    curvature of the nose bridge indicating a dorsal hump). However,
    since no public dataset exactly matches "surgical issues," an
    iterative training strategy with surgeon-labeled images is crucial.
    The good news is that with a GTX 4090, even large models (e.g. a
    ResNet50 with 25M parameters) can be fine-tuned quickly offline. All
    major frameworks (PyTorch, TensorFlow) are open-source (BSD/Apache
    licenses) and can be used locally.

-   **Pros:** Interpretable and precise results (actual measurements in
    mm or degrees) that align with clinical assessment; leverages
    well-validated open models (dlib, MediaPipe, FAN) for high accuracy
    landmark localization; fully offline and customizable. The approach
    is **extensible** -- new measurements or classifications can be
    added as needed (e.g. if surgeons want to assess eyelid ptosis, one
    can measure eyelid aperture from landmarks). It's also relatively
    easy to incorporate **feedback**: if the system's classification is
    wrong, one can adjust the decision logic or retrain the classifier
    on the corrected label. Similarly, if a landmark is misplaced, the
    surgeon can manually correct it and those corrections (plus perhaps
    augmented data) can be used to fine-tune the landmark model to be
    more robust over time. Tools like Dynaface even allow exporting all
    measurements to CSV for analysis -- surgeons could review these and
    set new thresholds or track improvement as the model learns.

-   **Cons:** This pipeline may require significant **initial tuning and
    data** for the classification aspect. While landmark detection is
    pre-trained and high-accuracy, the translation from measurements to
    a specific "diagnosis" (e.g. "needs rhinoplasty") is non-trivial.
    Without a sizable dataset of faces labeled with cosmetic issues, the
    ML classifier's accuracy might be limited initially. The rule-based
    approach can miss nuanced issues or give false positives if a
    patient's features are outside average ranges but still acceptable.
    Another challenge is handling variations in head pose or expressions
    -- extreme angles or smiles can throw off measurements. Ensuring the
    input images are standardized (frontal neutral expression, etc.)
    mitigates this. Lastly, whereas the model can pinpoint *that*
    something is asymmetrical, providing a precise **segment or
    visualization** of the issue area might require extra steps (like
    overlaying the facial midline or highlighting the larger eye). A
    face-part segmentation model (e.g. an open-source face parsing CNN)
    could be integrated if per-region masking is needed, but that adds
    complexity.

### 2. **Direct Deep Learning Attribute Classification**

This approach forgoes explicit measurements and lets a neural network
learn to identify cosmetic issues directly from images. It is
essentially an **end-to-end CNN classifier/regressor** that outputs
aesthetic judgments. For example, a model could be trained to output a
"symmetry score" or flags like "jaw asymmetry = Yes/No" from the raw
image. Modern face recognition backbones or aesthetic scoring models can
be repurposed here.

-   **Pre-trained Models:** Open-source models like **VGG-Face, FaceNet,
    or InsightFace** provide deep features that encapsulate facial
    structure. By training a final layer on top of such features, the
    network can predict specific attributes. Researchers have even
    tackled beauty prediction with deep learning (e.g. **SCUT-FBP5500**
    dataset for facial beauty) -- open implementations like
    *BeautyPredict AI* attempt to predict attractiveness scores, which
    often correlate with symmetry and proportion. We can leverage these
    as a starting point. For instance, take a ResNet50 pre-trained on
    VGGFace2 (which has learned facial structure representations) and
    fine-tune it on a custom dataset labeled for "ideal vs. needs
    improvement" in various facial regions. Transfer learning on a
    GTX 4090 will be swift, and frameworks like PyTorch (BSD license)
    make this accessible.

-   **Training Data & Feedback:** Initially, one might use proxy labels.
    CelebA's **"Big Nose" attribute** could serve as a rough label for
    noses that might benefit from reduction, "Heavy Eyebrows" might
    correlate with brow lift cases, etc. Over time, surgeon feedback can
    create a proprietary dataset: each time the surgeon corrects the AI
    (e.g. indicating the nose was misclassified), that image can be
    added to the training set with the correct label. The system can
    periodically retrain or use online learning to incorporate these
    corrections, gradually improving its **clinical relevance**. The
    closed-source tool *Aesthetics AI* reportedly performs a similar
    proportion analysis to tailor
    treatments[\[5\]](https://specialistpracticeexcellence.com.au/blog/best-ai-tools-agents-and-bots-for-plastic-surgeons-practices/#:~:text=%2A%20Aesthetics%20AI%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20AI,analysis%20tool%C2%A0for%C2%A0tailoring%20aesthetic%20treatments)
    -- an open variant could be achieved by continuously learning from
    expert inputs.

-   **Pros:** Potentially captures subtle features that rule-based
    methods might miss. A deep model can learn complex nonlinear
    relationships (like how a combination of slightly large nose and
    receding chin together influence facial harmony). It simplifies the
    pipeline -- one network can directly output multiple issue
    categories, rather than stringing together
    detection-measurement-classification. This approach could also yield
    a confidence score for each prediction (helpful to let surgeons
    focus on high-confidence flags). With enough data, this method might
    outperform fixed geometric criteria, especially for subjective
    aesthetic judgments.

-   **Cons:** **Data dependency** is the biggest drawback. Unlike
    landmarks (for which abundant training data and pre-trained models
    exist), there is no large public dataset labeled for "cosmetic
    surgery targets." The model's accuracy will heavily depend on
    incremental feedback and possibly synthetic data (e.g. augmenting
    images to simulate certain conditions). Until a robust dataset is
    built, the model might give inconsistent results. Moreover, deep
    models are **black boxes** -- a surgeon might want to know *why* the
    AI labeled something an issue. Explaining a neural network's
    prediction can be difficult (though one could highlight facial
    heatmaps via Grad-CAM to indicate important regions). Also, training
    a separate model for each specific issue (nose, chin, etc.) might be
    necessary to keep things interpretable, which complicates
    maintenance. In practice, this approach is best combined with the
    landmark-based method: e.g. use a deep model to double-check or
    refine what the geometric analysis found, thereby harnessing the
    strengths of both.

*(Approaches 1 and 2 above are not mutually exclusive -- they often work
together in an implemented system. Many practical solutions use robust
landmark detection as a foundation, then apply learned models or rules
on top.)*

### 3. **3D Photogrammetry and Morphometric Analysis**

A more elaborate approach uses **3D reconstruction** of the patient's
face from multiple 2D images, yielding a realistic 3D model for
analysis. This method prioritizes accuracy of measurements by overcoming
perspective distortions inherent in single images. Using
**photogrammetry**, one can capture a full facial geometry and then
compute precise distances and angles in 3D space (much like a CT scan,
but using just photographs).

-   **Image Capture:** Typically, a **multi-view camera setup** or a
    single camera taking many photos around the patient's face is
    required. For example, capturing \~8--16 images from various angles
    (front, 45° left/right, profile, up/down angles) provides coverage.
    In one open-source protocol, 16 simultaneous photos taken in 0.4
    seconds were used -- however, one can do it sequentially with a
    single DSLR or even a smartphone, instructing the patient to stay
    still. Good lighting and a neutral expression are important for
    quality reconstruction.

-   **Reconstruction Pipeline:** Open-source photogrammetry tools like
    **OpenMVG + OpenMVS**, or the fully integrated **Blender** workflow
    with add-ons, can be used. **OrtogOnBlender** and **RhinOnBlender**
    are Blender add-ons developed by Cícero Moraes et al., designed
    specifically for surgical planning. These use algorithms to stitch
    the photos into a 3D mesh of the face (employing
    Structure-from-Motion for camera pose estimation and Multi-View
    Stereo for surface reconstruction). The process is compute-intensive
    but offline -- a 4090 GPU can accelerate parts of OpenMVS's dense
    reconstruction (it supports CUDA). After processing, you obtain a
    detailed 3D model of the patient's face with real-scale dimensions
    (often textured for realism).

-   **Landmarks & Measurements:** In the 3D model, precise **landmark
    points** can be identified -- either manually by the surgeon or
    automatically. The open-source workflow often allows manual
    placement of standard points (nasion, pogonion, alar bases, gonion,
    etc.), but researchers have also automated this by projecting 2D
    landmark detections from photos onto the 3D mesh. Once landmarks are
    set, the system can compute a comprehensive set of measurements:
    linear distances (e.g. bizygomatic width), curvilinear lengths (e.g.
    along the nose bridge), angles (e.g. nasal dorsum angle, mandibular
    plane angle), and volumetric or surface metrics if needed. One study
    demonstrated incorporating custom measurements like the
    **cervicomental angle** easily in an open-source 3D analysis.
    Multiple measurements can be combined or compared to population
    norms automatically. The output is essentially a **digital facial
    analysis report**, analogous to what a surgeon does with calipers
    and protractors on a patient or 3D scan, but faster and more
    objective. Impressively, photogrammetric 3D models have been found
    *comparable in accuracy to CT scans*, with negligible human error
    introduced.

-   **Pros:** This approach offers **maximum accuracy** and detail. By
    working in true 3D, errors from head tilt or camera perspective are
    eliminated -- you can rotate the model to any viewpoint. Symmetry
    assessment is particularly robust: the face can be mirrored in 3D to
    quantify asymmetry in depth. For example, one can automatically
    compute a symmetry plane and measure deviations for each half of the
    face (techniques for 3D asymmetry indices are documented in recent
    AI research). The 3D model also enables **simulation**: surgeons can
    virtually modify the model (e.g. "shave down" a dorsal hump or
    advance the chin) and directly visualize potential outcomes.
    Open-source tools allow creating surgical guides or morphs -- e.g.
    the RhinOnBlender add-on can generate a 3D-printed guide for
    rhinoplasty based on the planned adjustments. In short, this
    pipeline not only flags issues but integrates with planning. It's
    fully offline; Blender (GPL license) and libraries like OpenMVG
    (MPL2) are open-source. A GTX 4090 and a strong CPU (for some
    single-threaded parts) can reconstruct a high-res face in minutes.
    The **surgeon's feedback** loop here is often natural: if an
    automatically placed landmark is off, the surgeon moves it in the
    Blender interface -- over time, these corrections could train an AI
    to place them better initially. If the system's analysis misses a
    measurement, the surgeon can add a custom point/angle definition and
    the software will include it for all future cases (thanks to the
    flexibility of open frameworks).

-   **Cons:** The main drawbacks are **complexity and setup cost**.
    Unlike the 2D methods (which only need a single photo and run in
    seconds), photogrammetry requires multiple images and careful
    calibration. Setting up a multi-camera rig or taking many photos can
    be time-consuming in a clinical workflow (though one could
    streamline it with a turntable or a fixed camera array). The
    processing pipeline is heavy -- while a 4090 can help, parts of the
    reconstruction may still take several minutes, and there is a
    learning curve to using Blender add-ons. Another consideration is
    that fully **automating** this pipeline is challenging: often a
    human must verify or adjust the 3D model and landmarks. Thus,
    initial use might involve the surgeon or an assistant spending some
    time in the software per patient. However, given that accuracy is
    the top priority, this trade-off might be acceptable. Lastly, while
    the tools are open-source, they are under active development by a
    niche community -- documentation can be sparse. The developer
    integrating this should be comfortable with Blender's Python API and
    possibly troubleshooting openMVG/MVS outputs. In terms of licenses:
    Blender's GPL means any custom code that directly links with it
    should be open-sourced if distributed, but using the tool internally
    in a practice doesn't pose an issue. The add-ons like OrtogOnBlender
    are free to use (they bundle the needed libraries).

### 4. **Hybrid & Other Approaches**

Some solutions combine elements of the above. For instance, **2.5D
single-image 3D models** can be generated with deep networks (e.g.
**3DDFA** or **DECA** models that predict a 3D face mesh from one photo)
-- giving some of the benefits of 3D analysis without multi-view
capture. These can be integrated into the pipeline to get approximate
depth measures from a single image. Another hybrid idea is using **face
parsing segmentation** (open models that label each facial region --
eyes, nose, lips, etc.) to isolate regions and apply targeted analysis
on each. For example, one could segment the nose and compare its shape
to a dataset of "ideal" noses via a neural network. Each of these
variations has pros/cons (e.g. single-image 3D is faster but less
accurate than true photogrammetry). In practice, a full solution might
use multiple subsystems: one for symmetry, one for proportions, one for
texture/skin issues, etc., orchestrated together.

**Closed-Source Benchmarks:** It's worth noting a few proprietary tools
for context. Products like **Visia®** (Canfield) provide facial analysis
focusing on skin and proportions for cosmetic consultations, and
**Crisalix®** offers 3D morphing for surgery simulation. Newer startups
(e.g. *Qoves AI* or *Aedit*) market AI-driven facial assessments that
suggest treatments. For example, *DeepFace AI* (not to be confused with
Meta's algorithm) claims to create customized surgical plans, and
*Aesthetics AI* focuses on proportion analysis. These systems are often
cloud-based and not open-source, but they underscore the feasibility of
what we seek. Our emphasis, however, is on open solutions that a clinic
can deploy offline.

In summary, **Approach 1 (2D landmarks + analysis)** and **Approach 3
(3D photogrammetry)** emerge as the **two best solutions** given the
priorities. The 2D landmark pipeline is relatively easier to implement
and can improve with incremental data, while the 3D pipeline offers
unparalleled measurement accuracy and a rich basis for surgical
planning. Below, we provide step-by-step implementation guides for each.

## Solution 1: Deep Landmark & Feature Analysis Pipeline (Step-by-Step)

*Objective:* Build an offline system that takes one or a few 2D photos
(frontal face, and optionally profile) and outputs an analysis of
cosmetic issues, based on landmark measurements and learned feature
classification. This system will run on a local PC with an NVIDIA 4090.
All components will be open-source or locally hosted.

**Steps:**

1.  **Environment Setup:** Install Python (preferably 3.9+ for latest
    libraries) and set up a virtual environment. Install PyTorch or
    TensorFlow (for GPU, use `torch==<latest>` with CUDA 11/12 support,
    or `tensorflow-gpu`). Ensure NVIDIA drivers and CUDA are installed
    for the 4090. Also install OpenCV (`opencv-python`), which will be
    used for image I/O and potentially face detection backends.

2.  **Face Detection Model:** Integrate a robust face detector to locate
    faces in input images. We recommend **RetinaFace** (open-source
    implementation from the InsightFace project). Model Source:
    InsightFace provides a pretrained RetinaFace ResNet50 model (Apache
    License 2.0) which can be downloaded from their GitHub.
    Alternatively, use OpenCV's DNN with a pretrained model or dlib's
    frontal face detector as a fallback.

3.  Download the RetinaFace model (e.g. `retinaface-R50` .onnx or .pth
    from InsightFace).

4.  Write a function to load the model and run face detection on the
    input image. This should return the face bounding box (and
    five-point landmarks if using RetinaFace's output).

5.  **Hardware:** The detection model will use minimal GPU memory.
    Running on the 4090, inference for a single image is \<50ms.

6.  **Facial Landmark Detection:** Use a high-accuracy landmark model to
    get detailed facial keypoints. One option is the **face-alignment**
    PyTorch library by Adrian Bulat. It provides a simple API: e.g.
    `fa = FaceAlignment(LandmarksType._2D, device='cuda')` then
    `preds = fa.get_landmarks(image)`. This returns 68 landmarks in
    pixel coordinates. Under the hood it uses an HRNet/FAN model
    (pretrained on 300W-LP), which is included in the package. License:
    BSD 3-Clause.

7.  Install it via pip (`pip install face-alignment`) and its
    dependencies (will pull torch, numpy, etc.).

8.  Alternatively, use **Mediapipe Face Mesh** if you want 468
    landmarks. For Mediapipe, install `mediapipe-python` and use its
    FaceMesh solution (license Apache 2.0). Keep in mind Mediapipe runs
    on CPU by default; however it's real-time even on CPU. With GPU
    acceleration (if enabled via OpenGL), it's extremely fast. Since our
    focus is accuracy and we have a strong GPU, the face-alignment CNN
    might be preferable for precision. You can even run both: e.g. use
    face-alignment for primary points and FaceMesh to get dense contour
    points if needed.

9.  Ensure the image is cropped to the face ROI (detector output) before
    landmark prediction for best results. The face-alignment library can
    accept a detected box or will do internal detection (it uses SFD by
    default, but we already have RetinaFace for possibly better
    detection).

10. Verify the output by overlaying the landmarks on the image (for
    development/debugging). All points should map to expected facial
    features. On a well-centered front photo, the average error of these
    models is only a few pixels.

11. **Hardware:** The landmark model is a \~100MB CNN; on the 4090 it
    will run in a few milliseconds per face.

12. **Feature Computation (Geometry):** With landmarks in hand, compute
    key measurements:

13. **Facial Symmetry:** Determine the facial midline. For simplicity,
    you can use the line through the midpoint of the eyes and midpoint
    of the lips as an approximate symmetry axis. Reflect one side's
    landmarks onto the other side and compute RMS error or distance for
    pairs (e.g. left vs right jaw angle, eye positions). Dynaface, for
    example, computes symmetry scores per feature (eyes, eyebrows,
    mouth,
    etc.)[\[6\]](https://github.com/GauravSharma0560/face-symmetry#:~:text=GauravSharma0560%2Fface,feature%20will%20be%20printed).
    You can implement similar: e.g. distance between left and right eye
    heights divided by a reference (like inter-eye distance) to quantify
    vertical asymmetry. Output overall symmetry percentage (100% =
    perfect symmetry).

14. **Proportions & Ratios:** Calculate ratios such as: (Nose length) /
    (Chin--Nose distance), (Lip width) / (Face width), (Interocular
    distance) / (Face width), etc. Compare these to ideal values from
    literature (for instance, the "Rule of Thirds" suggests equal thirds
    for hairline-to-eyebrow, eyebrow-to-nose, nose-to-chin distances).
    Flag any major deviations (beyond, say, 1--2 standard deviations of
    average). If available, incorporate known aesthetic indices -- e.g.
    the **Marlowe--Ricketts line** for profile analysis or the **golden
    ratio mask** for frontal proportions -- though those might require
    profile images or additional points.

15. **Feature-specific metrics:** For each region:
    -   *Eyes:* Check eye aperture and inclination (canthality). E.g., a
        drooping eyelid could be flagged if the visible iris percentage
        is below a threshold -- but that might need a classifier or
        segmentation of the eye. Simpler: measure if one eye's opening
        (distance between upper and lower eyelid landmarks) is
        significantly smaller than the other, which might indicate
        ptosis.
    -   *Nose:* Measure nose width (alae width) relative to
        interpupillary distance; measure nose length vs face height. A
        common guideline is the nose width should roughly equal the
        intercanthal distance. Also check nasal symmetry: is the
        columella deviated? If profile photo is provided, measure dorsal
        hump or nasolabial angle (requires profile landmarks for nose
        tip, subnasale, upper lip).
    -   *Chin/Jaw:* Measure chin prominence. If profile is available,
        the pogonion (chin tip) to a reference line (e.g. vertical from
        glabella) can indicate retrusion or protrusion. With just a
        front image, one proxy is the jaw width vs upper face width, or
        the menton point's deviation from midline.
    -   *Lips:* Measure width of mouth vs nose or vs face. Also lip
        thickness if visible (height of upper/lower lip). If very thin
        compared to some norm, that's a feature often targeted
        (fillers).
    -   *Others:* You can include forehead height (if hairline visible),
        facial width/height ratio (sometimes an aesthetic factor), etc.

16. Structure the code to compute these metrics from the landmark
    coordinates. It might be useful to create a small function for each
    measurement, for clarity and reusability. Store results in a
    dictionary.

17. **Issue Classification (Rules):** Based on the above measurements,
    derive an initial set of "diagnoses." For each metric, decide if
    it's in a normal range. For example:

18. If left--right symmetry score \< 90% on eyes or jaw, mark **"Facial
    asymmetry"** issue.

19. If nose width \> interpupillary distance, mark **"Wide nose"**
    (could correspond to potential rhinoplasty interest).

20. If nose length \>\> chin length (lower third), mark **"Long nose"**.

21. If chin is behind expected position (from profile or from proportion
    like jaw width too broad relative to chin point), mark **"Receding
    chin"** or **"Weak jawline."**

22. If lip height is very thin (say upper lip height \< 0.1 \* mouth
    width), mark **"Thin lips."**

23. Use known clinical standards when possible. For instance, nasofacial
    angle, if profile available, ideal \~36°. Or nasolabial angle (ideal
    \~95-105° for females). Deviation beyond 10° could be flagged.

24. Each rule can be coded with a threshold. Initially, use literature
    or expert estimates. (Surgeon input is valuable here -- perhaps set
    these thresholds in config so they can be tweaked easily.)

25. **Issue Classification (ML Model -- optional but recommended):**
    Augment the rule-based system with a machine learning model that
    learns from data:

26. **Data preparation:** If you have any labeled data (even small),
    e.g. a set of patient photos with notes like "deviated septum" or
    "jaw asymmetry", compile them. Also, consider using *CelebA*
    attributes as surrogate labels: for each relevant attribute ("Big
    Nose", "Narrow Eyes", "Attractive" etc.), you can train a
    classifier. Download CelebA (200k celebrity images with 40
    attributes, released for research). Many of those attributes
    correlate with cosmetic considerations.

27. **Model selection:** Use a pre-trained CNN like ResNet50 (available
    from torchvision, under BSD-like license) to extract features.
    Replace the top layer with new outputs for each attribute of
    interest (or each issue category). For example, have outputs:
    {asymmetry, big_nose, receding_chin, etc.} as binary labels. You
    might start with 5-10 broad categories.

28. **Training:** Fine-tune the model on whatever dataset you have. If
    using CelebA, it's as simple as loading the images and attribute
    labels and training for those labels. You will need to align/resize
    faces -- use the landmarks to align eyes horizontally for
    consistency. Since accuracy is priority and not real-time, you can
    afford a heavier model or even an ensemble. Train on the 4090 (it
    can handle large batches; this is all offline). Evaluate performance
    on a validation set if possible.

29. **Integration:** Once trained, this model can take a face crop as
    input and output probabilities for each learned issue. You'd then
    combine this with the rule-based findings. For example, if rules
    flagged "wide nose" and the CNN also has high confidence on "Big
    Nose," that reinforces the finding. If the CNN flags something the
    rules missed (say it predicts "chin issue" with high confidence even
    if your simple measurements didn't trigger), you can include a note
    like "AI suggests chin retrusion -- review recommended."

30. Model source: If not training from scratch, there are open-source
    pre-trained attribute models. One such is an unofficial **CelebA
    attribute classifier** (there are GitHub repos, often MIT license,
    that provide pretrained weights for attribute prediction). Ensure
    any model you use is under a permissible license for your use-case
    (research vs commercial).

31. Over time, retrain this model with **feedback data**: every time
    surgeons correct the system, add that case (with corrected label) to
    your training set and periodically retrain to incorporate the new
    knowledge.

32. **Results Aggregation:** Design the output format. A concise report
    could be generated, for example:

33. **Facial Symmetry:** 88% (Slight asymmetry noted -- right jaw is
    lower than left).

34. **Proportions:** Face length/width ratio = 1.35 (within normal
    range); Midface proportion (Nose length vs Chin) = High (recommend
    evaluation of chin projection).

35. **Detected Issues:**
    -   *Nasal asymmetry:* Yes -- Nose appears deviated towards left by
        \~3mm.
    -   *Nasal proportion:* Nose width is larger than ideal (46mm vs
        ideal \~36mm).
    -   *Chin retrusion:* Probable -- Chin is behind ideal position (AI
        confidence 0.85).
    -   *Jaw asymmetry:* Yes -- Mandibular angles not symmetric (angle
        difference \~5°).
    -   *Others:* Thin lips (borderline), Brow ptosis (No significant
        issue).

36. Use the rule outputs and ML outputs to fill in this report. Keep
    language clear that these are **AI findings, not diagnoses**, for
    medico-legal safety. The output could be in text form or overlaid on
    images (e.g. draw lines/angles on the face image for visualization).

37. If desired, generate an **annotated image**: for instance, draw
    landmark points and perhaps highlight regions of concern (you could
    draw a dashed line tracing an ideal symmetric jaw vs. the patient's
    jaw). OpenCV drawing functions can do this. This visual feedback is
    helpful for surgeons to quickly see what the AI is indicating.

38. **User Interface:** Depending on how this will be used by a
    developer or end-user (surgeon), you might create a simple GUI. For
    example, a small Qt or Tkinter app where a user can load a photo(s)
    and then see the analysis. Given that the requirement is not
    real-time, a simple interface is fine. Ensure that the app does not
    require internet (all models local). If security is important
    (patient data), confirm that everything runs locally with no data
    leaving the machine.

39. **Feedback Loop for Improvement:** Plan how surgeons will provide
    corrections and how those will update the system:

40. For classification corrections: If the AI flags "needs rhinoplasty"
    but the surgeon disagrees, the surgeon could press a "Incorrect"
    button next to that suggestion. The system should log that feedback
    (perhaps in a JSON or database with the image ID and the corrected
    label). Similarly, if the AI missed something ("It didn't mention
    the chin but I think chin augmentation is needed"), the surgeon
    should be able to add that note. All these feedback instances become
    new training examples. Periodically (say after accumulating 50 new
    cases), a developer or an automated process can retrain the ML
    models with the updated labels. This could even be scheduled during
    off-hours on the 4090, as training might take a few minutes to an
    hour depending on data size.

41. For landmark/segmentation corrections: If a landmark was off
    (suppose the outer canthus was misplaced due to heavy makeup), and
    the surgeon drags it to the correct spot on the image, you can
    capture the adjusted coordinates. Over time, you could fine-tune the
    landmark model (if you have access to its training procedure) on
    such corrected data -- this is more involved, as you would need to
    add these as ground truth in the training set for that model and
    retrain or at least do a few epochs of fine-tuning. However, given
    the landmark model is already very accurate, this may not be
    frequently needed. An alternative is to incorporate a **small
    adjustment module**: e.g. a lightweight model that learns the bias
    in landmark positioning from your data and corrects them (this is an
    advanced step and may not be necessary unless a consistent bias is
    observed).

42. Maintain version control for the models and a log of changes. Since
    surgeons will be using this as a clinical tool, validate each new
    model's outputs to ensure no regressions (you don't want the system
    to suddenly mis-detect something it used to do well).

43. **Testing and Calibration:** Before deploying widely, test the
    pipeline on a diverse set of images (different ages, ethnicities,
    lighting conditions). Because accuracy is paramount, you want to
    catch scenarios where it might fail (e.g. extreme expressions,
    occlusions like glasses, etc.). You might incorporate checks like:
    if face confidence is low or landmarks had to be extrapolated, flag
    the result as less reliable. This can prevent mis-analysis on poor
    inputs. Calibrate thresholds for issue flags so that the system
    isn't overzealous -- a conservative approach is to flag fewer issues
    initially, to avoid "overcalling" normal variation as problems, and
    gradually tune sensitivity based on what surgeons find useful.

**Licenses & Sources Recap (Solution 1):** All components used are
open-source: - *Face Detection:* RetinaFace (InsightFace) -- MIT
License; or OpenCV (BSD license); or dlib (Boost license). -
*Landmarks:* face-alignment (BSD-3); MediaPipe (Apache 2.0). -
*Frameworks:* PyTorch (BSD-style), TensorFlow (Apache 2.0). - *Training
Data:* CelebA (freely available for non-commercial research; for
commercial use, check their terms), or custom data collected under
consent. - *Your Code:* Will likely be proprietary to the clinic, but
since it links against these libraries, you can keep it closed source if
desired (none of the chosen licenses are viral, except if using GPL
components like some dlib models -- but the ones listed avoid GPL). If
you were to incorporate this into Blender or use GPL code, then you'd
have to open-source those specific parts.

**Hardware Requirements:** A single GTX 4090 (24GB VRAM) is more than
sufficient. In fact, this pipeline would run on a much smaller GPU, but
the 4090 allows faster training and the option to use bigger models. A
multi-core CPU (8+ cores, 32GB+ RAM) is recommended for general
processing and potential training tasks. Disk space: if storing many
images or datasets (CelebA is \~2GB), ensure you have 50--100GB free for
data and model files. No internet is needed once all models and data are
downloaded. The entire analysis of one face image (inference through
detection, landmarks, and rule evaluation) should take only a fraction
of a second on this hardware, meaning the bottleneck is more about the
user interpreting results than the computation.

## Solution 2: 3D Photogrammetry Pipeline (Step-by-Step)

*Objective:* Build an offline system that reconstructs a 3D model of a
patient's face from photographs and provides precise measurements and
visualizations of cosmetic metrics. This solution focuses on accuracy
and detail, leveraging the GTX 4090 for computation. We will use
open-source tools like Blender with specialized add-ons and computer
vision libraries.

**Steps:**

1.  **Set Up 3D Software and Libraries:** Install **Blender** (an
    open-source 3D modeling software, GPL license). Blender is the core
    platform where the 3D reconstruction and analysis will take place.
    The latest Blender (\>= v3.x) is recommended for performance. Next,
    obtain the Blender add-ons **OrtogOnBlender** and **RhinOnBlender**
    (developed by Cicero Moraes et al.). These can be found on GitHub
    (e.g., `cogitas3d/OrtogOnBlender`). Download the add-on `.zip` and
    install it into Blender (Edit -\> Preferences -\> Add-ons -\>
    Install from File). OrtogOnBlender includes photogrammetry functions
    (wrapping OpenMVG/OpenMVS) and surgical planning tools for
    orthognathic surgery, while RhinOnBlender focuses on rhinoplasty
    (with additional tooling for nasal guide creation). Ensure these
    add-ons are enabled in Blender.

2.  **Photogrammetry Tools:** If not bundled with the add-on, install
    **OpenMVG** (for Structure-from-Motion) and **OpenMVS** (for
    Multi-View Stereo). OrtogOnBlender often comes with these packaged
    or offers a one-click download within the add-on UI (check the
    documentation or GitHub issues if any manual setup is needed). Both
    OpenMVG and OpenMVS are open-source (MPL2 and GPL3 respectively).
    They perform the heavy lifting of turning images into a sparse 3D
    point cloud (OpenMVG) and then into a dense mesh (OpenMVS). The 4090
    can accelerate OpenMVS's densification if compiled with CUDA --
    verify that OpenMVS is built with CUDA support. You might need to
    compile from source if pre-built binaries lack GPU support.
    Alternatively, **COLMAP** is another open-source SfM/MVS solution
    (GPL) that could be used similarly, but OrtogOnBlender is designed
    to integrate OpenMVG/MVS.

3.  **Image Acquisition Protocol:** Develop a standard procedure for
    capturing patient photos:

4.  Ideally, use a **DSLR or high-quality mirrorless camera** for
    consistent images. Smartphone cameras can work (as noted in
    literature: a smartphone photogrammetry protocol can yield results
    comparable to 3D scanners), but ensure consistent settings (same
    focal length, no heavy distortion or beauty filters).

5.  Capture a **minimum of 8 images**: front view, left 45°, right 45°,
    left profile (90°), right profile, and optionally upper and lower
    angled views (looking slightly up at the chin and down at the
    forehead). More images (12-16) can improve quality. The add-on's
    documentation provides guidance; for example, a protocol might
    involve the patient turning 360° while photos are taken every \~30°.

6.  Use a neutral background and even lighting to avoid shadows on the
    face (which can affect reconstruction). Ask the patient to maintain
    a neutral expression (no smile) and a natural head position.

7.  Calibrate your camera if possible (to correct lens distortion).
    OpenMVG can handle unknown camera intrinsics by optimizing them, but
    providing an initial calibration (focal length, distortion
    coefficients) improves accuracy.

8.  Once images are taken, transfer them to the workstation. For each
    patient, create a folder (e.g., `Patient123_photos/`) and put all
    the JPEGs there.

9.  **3D Reconstruction Process:** Using Blender with OrtogOnBlender:

10. Open Blender and switch to the OrtogOnBlender interface (it might
    add a menu or panel in the 3D View or the Properties sidebar). There
    should be a section for Photogrammetry.

11. Load the patient images into the add-on. OrtogOnBlender likely
    provides a button like "Import Photos for 3D Reconstruction" or "Run
    Photogrammetry". Click that and select the folder of images.

12. Start the reconstruction. The add-on will internally call OpenMVG to
    compute features and matches between photos, then compute camera
    poses (this yields a sparse point cloud and camera calibration).
    Then it calls OpenMVS to compute a dense point cloud and mesh. This
    process can take a few minutes depending on number of images and
    resolution. With a GTX 4090, dense reconstruction is significantly
    accelerated, but still expect on the order of 5--15 minutes for \~12
    photos at 24MP each, for example.

13. Monitor the console for progress (Blender's system console will show
    OpenMVG/MVS logs). If any step fails (e.g. images not enough
    overlap, or an image was blurry and threw off camera alignment), you
    may need to recapture or adjust settings. Common pitfalls: if the
    patient moved significantly or the background had many features, the
    reconstruction might lock onto background. It helps to have the
    patient fill most of the frame and minimize background clutter.

14. Once completed, the add-on should import the resulting **3D face
    mesh** into Blender's scene. You'll likely see a textured model of
    the face. Save this Blender file for the patient (so you can revisit
    it later for planning or re-measuring if needed).

15. **Landmark Placement on 3D Model:** With the 3D face model ready,
    the next step is identifying key anatomical landmarks on it for
    measurements. There are two ways:

16. **Manual landmarking:** The add-ons provide a set of predefined
    points you can place. For example, RhinOnBlender might have slots
    for "Pronasale (nose tip)", "Subnasale", "Pogonion (chin tip)",
    "Tragion (ears)", etc. Activate a mode where you can click on the 3D
    model to mark these points. Because accuracy matters, a surgeon or
    trained assistant should do this -- they can rotate the model to
    ensure they place the point exactly on the intended spot (e.g., the
    most projecting point of the chin for pogonion). OrtogOnBlender was
    used for orthognathic surgery planning, so it likely has points like
    orbitale, nasion, gnathion, etc. Use as many landmarks as needed for
    a full analysis (e.g., at least: bilateral exocanthion (eye
    corners), endocanthion, alar base points, subnasale, tip, supratip,
    pogonion, menton (chin bottom), gonion (jaw corners), zygion (cheek
    width), tragus or ear reference if needed).

17. **Automatic landmarking (experimental):** If you want to automate,
    you could project 2D landmarks onto the model. Since in Step 1
    solution we already can get 2D landmarks on each photo, one approach
    is: take the 2D landmarks from the front photo (for example) and
    find their corresponding 3D coordinates. OpenMVG produces a sparse
    point cloud with feature correspondences -- if some landmarks (like
    eye corners) were detected in the images, you could intersect rays
    to approximate their 3D location. However, doing this robustly is
    complex. Another approach is to use a 3D morphable model fitting
    (like 3DDFA) directly to get a full set of 3D points. Given the
    scope, it's acceptable to rely on manual marking, which surgeons may
    actually prefer for now (to trust the exact location).

18. After landmark placement, record their coordinates. The add-on might
    automatically label and save them. If not, you can use Blender's
    Python console to retrieve coordinates of specific vertices or
    empties that you placed as markers.

19. **Measurements & Analysis in 3D:** Now calculate the desired
    measurements using the 3D coordinates of those landmarks. This can
    be done via Blender's Python scripting or via the add-on's built-in
    functions:

20. **Linear distances:** Compute distances between key points: e.g.,
    *Bi-zygoma width* (distance between left and right zygion points),
    *Jaw width* (distance between left and right gonion), *Face height*
    (nasion to menton), *Nose length* (nasion to subnasale or bridge
    length), *Nose width* (alar base distance), *Eye distance* (left
    endocanthion to right endocanthion). Because this is true 3D, these
    distances are in millimeters (assuming the reconstruction is
    properly scaled). Often photogrammetry yields a scaled model, but
    sometimes scale is ambiguous. If the add-on allows, set a known
    distance (like a reference object or the distance between pupils as
    \~65 mm) to scale the model appropriately.

21. **Angles:** Compute angles between lines or planes: e.g.,
    *Nasofrontal angle* (angle at nasion formed by
    glabella--nasion--nasal tip lines), *Nasolabial angle* (between
    columella and upper lip, using subnasale as vertex), *Mandibular
    plane angle* (between a line through gonion--gonion and a horizontal
    reference), *Intercanthal tilt* (if eyes are not level, small angle
    formed by line connecting canthi vs horizontal). Use vector math on
    coordinates to get these. In Blender's Python, you can define
    vectors and use dot products for angles.

22. **Symmetry analysis:** Determine the mid-sagittal plane of the face.
    One way: use the landmarks on the midline (nasion, subnasale,
    pogonion, menton) to define a plane. Reflect the coordinates of
    left-side points onto the right side and measure the distances to
    actual right-side points. Or compute the distance of each landmark
    from the mid-plane. This yields a quantitative asymmetry for each
    feature. The add-on or a script can automate this: e.g., output
    "Left cheek is 4mm fuller than right cheek" or "Chin deviated 2mm to
    left of center". Photogrammetry shines here because it captures
    depth differences (e.g. one cheekbone forward vs the other).

23. **Volume/Surface measurements (optional):** For certain issues like
    hemifacial microsomia or soft-tissue volume loss, volume could be
    relevant. One can mark a region (say one cheek) and calculate its
    surface area or volume vs the other side. This is advanced and
    likely beyond initial requirements, but know that with a 3D mesh
    such calculations are possible (Blender can compute volume of a mesh
    region).

24. It might be helpful to use an **automated report generator**. For
    example, OrtogOnBlender might output a text summary of common
    measurements once you place the standard landmarks. Check if the
    documentation mentions generating a "facial analysis report". If
    not, writing a custom Python script to do it is feasible. (The
    abstract from WJPS 2024 indicates they *automated combinations of
    measurements for comprehensive analysis* and generated a detailed
    report -- likely through scripting Blender and perhaps using
    spreadsheets.)

25. **Results Presentation:** Present the findings to the user (surgeon)
    in a clear format:

26. Within Blender, you could create annotation text objects or use the
    add-on's interface to list measurements. However, expecting a
    surgeon to read Blender's UI might be less ideal. Instead, consider
    exporting the results.

27. **Generate a PDF or print-out:** The system can populate a template
    report with the numbers and perhaps simple graphics. For example,
    include a front and profile screenshot of the 3D model with
    landmarks indicated (Blender can be scripted to take snapshots from
    set angles). Draw lines or angles on these images to illustrate
    measurements (maybe use Blender's grease pencil or after export, use
    OpenCV to draw over the images). Then compile the images and text
    into a PDF. Python libraries like ReportLab or even just LaTeX (if
    familiar) could do this.

28. The report might have sections like: "Craniofacial Measurements vs
    Norms" -- listing each measure, the patient's value, and normal
    range for that ethnicity/sex/age if available. Highlight any
    out-of-range values. For instance: "Nasal Width: 45mm (norm \~35mm
    for face width 140mm) -- **High**" or "Chin deviation: 3.5mm left --
    **Noticeable asymmetry**".

29. Also present asymmetry visually: perhaps produce a *mirrored image
    comparison*. A classic approach is to mirror each half of the 3D
    face to show how the patient would look if perfectly symmetric to
    one side. Qoves and other aesthetic analysis sometimes do this to
    highlight differences. You can do this in Blender by duplicating the
    mesh, cutting it in half, mirroring one half, and overlaying -- then
    exporting an image. This is more for demonstration than measurement,
    but it can be compelling in consultations.

30. If rhinoplasty is a focus: include specific nasal analysis -- e.g.,
    dorsal profile line smoothness, any deviations, etc. The
    RhinOnBlender add-on can create a *surgical guide* if needed (it was
    used to design cutting guides for nasal bone adjustments). If the
    surgeon is interested, the guide (an STL model) can be generated and
    exported for 3D printing, though that's beyond analysis into
    planning/execution.

31. **Interactive Exploration:** One advantage of an offline local setup
    is that the surgeon can directly manipulate the model. Encourage
    usage of Blender's interactive tools:

32. The surgeon can rotate and zoom the 3D face to inspect features from
    any angle, something not possible with 2D photos alone.

33. They can **simulate changes**: For example, Blender's sculpting
    tools allow you to subtly modify the mesh (push the nose bridge
    down, augment the chin forward, etc.). This can act as a quick
    "simulation" of surgery outcomes. The add-ons might have specific
    tools for this (like moving jaw segments in orthognathic planning).

34. These simulations are not fully automated, but with a bit of Blender
    skill, it's doable. It can help verify if the identified issues,
    when corrected, indeed lead to an improved proportion/symmetry,
    reinforcing the AI's suggestions.

35. Since all data stays on the machine, patient confidentiality is
    preserved (no cloud processing), which is crucial for medical
    applications. Remind the team to follow privacy best practices
    (e.g., secure storage of these models and images, as they are
    patient-identifiable).

36. **Feedback & Improvement:** Incorporating feedback in this pipeline
    largely means refining the process and perhaps introducing more
    automation over time:

37. If a surgeon consistently finds that they have to add a certain
    measurement that our system didn't include (say, orbital
    hypertelorism distance), we can update the script to calculate that
    once the relevant landmarks are placed. Because the system is
    open-source and scriptable, it's straightforward to extend. For
    instance, adding a measurement of eye-to-eye angle or forehead
    curvature is just a matter of geometry once the points are
    available.

38. Landmark placement feedback: if some points are repeatedly tedious
    to place, consider automating them. You could, for example, train a
    small model using the accumulated data of manually placed points on
    meshes. This is complex (since it requires correlating 2D image
    features to 3D surfaces), but a workaround could be to project the
    3D model to 2D and run a 2D landmark detector, then snap those to
    the 3D surface. Perhaps a future improvement is integrating
    something like **Statistical Shape Models** or a Morphable Model
    that can fit to the photogrammetry output for a fully automatic
    landmarking. The pipeline is modular, so these can be introduced
    later without changing the overall flow.

39. If photogrammetry fails or is impractical for some cases (e.g.,
    patient can't provide multiple photos), have a contingency: fall
    back to the 2D approach (Solution 1). In practice, you might
    integrate both solutions -- e.g., do a quick 2D analysis from the
    front photo immediately (for instant feedback), and then do the full
    3D analysis when the model is ready for high precision results.

40. **Hardware and Performance Considerations:** The GTX 4090 will
    primarily accelerate the dense reconstruction stage (OpenMVS).
    Ensure in Blender's settings or the add-on config that GPU is
    enabled for compute. Also, have ample RAM -- reconstructing a dense
    mesh from many photos can use 16GB+ RAM easily. A fast NVMe SSD is
    helpful for storing the temporary files (MVS will write depth maps,
    etc.). Keep the system's thermals in check during reconstruction
    since it's intensive. For reproducibility, maintain consistent
    versions of the photogrammetry libraries -- updates can change
    results slightly. If you find a setup that works reliably, document
    it (e.g., OpenMVG v2.x, OpenMVS v1.x, Blender 3.x).

**Licenses & Sources Recap (Solution 2):** - Blender -- GNU GPL v3 (free
to use, must open-source any Blender *plugins* you write if distributed,
but using it internally is fine). - OrtogOnBlender & RhinOnBlender
add-ons -- open-source (they don't explicitly state license in the
snippet, but being on GitHub and referenced academically implies free
use; likely GPL aligned with Blender). These add-ons were described in
academic work as free alternatives for surgical planning. - OpenMVG --
MPL2 (permissive; you can use it in closed software if needed). -
OpenMVS -- GPL3 (if you distribute software that links to it, you'd need
to make that portion GPL; however, using it as an external program from
Blender is fine). Since we're using it through Blender add-ons,
Blender's GPL already covers it. - All these components are offline and
open. The only caveat is if one wanted to integrate a proprietary
photogrammetry engine (like Agisoft Metashape or RealityCapture) for
possibly faster reconstruction -- we won't, because open-source is
preferred here. The chosen pipeline, while perhaps slightly less
user-friendly than commercial software, has the advantage of cost-free
use and **extensibility** (we can script and modify it at will).

**Expected Hardware Requirements:** - **GPU:** NVIDIA RTX 4090 -- used
for accelerating OpenMVS and possibly for viewport rendering in Blender.
The 4090's 24GB VRAM can handle very high-resolution reconstructions
(you could reconstruct millions of points into a mesh). - **CPU:** A
multi-core CPU is heavily used by OpenMVG (feature extraction/matching
can be multi-threaded) and parts of OpenMVS. A high clock speed helps
for single-thread tasks too. A modern 12-core+ CPU (e.g., Ryzen 9 or
Intel i9) is recommended. - **RAM:** 32GB minimum. If processing very
high-res images or a large number of images, 64GB is safer to avoid
swapping. - **Storage:** Each project (set of photos + reconstruction)
can take a few hundred MB (the mesh and texture files). Also, OpenMVS
will temporarily use disk for depth maps -- ensure the temp directory
has a few tens of GB free. An SSD is ideal for this scratch space. -
**Peripherals:** A good camera for image capture (not exactly hardware
*in* the system, but part of the solution). Optionally, a turntable or
tripod setup to facilitate taking consistent photos around the
patient. - **Time per analysis:** Plan on \~10 minutes for
reconstruction plus a few minutes for landmarking and computation. This
is longer than the 2D approach, but still possibly within a consultation
session. Improvements like GPU-accelerated SfM (or reducing image count)
can shorten it if needed, but at slight cost to detail.

By implementing these two solutions, a clinic would have a powerful
toolkit: the 2D pipeline for quick screening and continuous AI learning,
and the 3D pipeline for in-depth, quantitatively accurate analysis and
surgical planning. Both run entirely offline on the given hardware,
ensuring patient privacy and system responsiveness. Over time, with
surgeon corrections fed back into the system, the accuracy and relevance
of the analyses will only improve, ultimately providing a decision
support system that augments the surgeon's expertise with data-driven
insights.

**Sources:**

-   Bulat, A. & Tzimiropoulos, G. (2017). *How far are we from solving
    the 2D & 3D Face Alignment problem?* (Face Alignment Network) --
    Implementation by 1adrianb (BSD License).
-   Heaton, J. (2025). *Dynaface: Facial Symmetry Measurement Tool*
    (Apache-2.0) -- 97-landmark detection and symmetry analysis.
-   Stailey-Young, A. (2023). *RetinaFace* noted as most accurate
    open-source face
    detector[\[1\]](https://medium.com/pythons-gurus/what-is-the-best-face-detector-ab650d8c1225#:~:text=RetinaFace%20has%20a%20reputation%20for,results%20back%20up%20that%20reputation).
-   MediaPipe Face Mesh by Google -- 468 landmarks in real-time
    on-device[\[2\]](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-3D-facial-surface-of-468-points-in-MediaPipe-Face-Mesh_fig4_367301766#:~:text=The%203D%20facial%20surface%20of,the%20need%20for%20a).
-   Peixoto, D. *et al.* (2024). *Open Source Framework for Precise
    Digital Facial Analysis.* -- Photogrammetry with 16 images, Blender
    reconstruction, automated measurements.
-   Sobral, D. *et al.* (2021). *RhinOnBlender Add-on for Rhinoplasty
    Planning.* -- Blender add-on for photogrammetry and surgical guide
    creation.
-   Adel, M. *et al.* (2025). *AI-based 3D Facial Asymmetry Assessment.*
    -- Automated landmark-based asymmetry index comparable to manual,
    demonstrating AI precision on 3D images.
-   Specialist Practice Excellence (2023). *AI Tools for Plastic
    Surgeons.* -- Mentions of BeautyPredict (symmetry-based outcome
    predictor) and Aesthetics AI (proportion
    analysis)[\[5\]](https://specialistpracticeexcellence.com.au/blog/best-ai-tools-agents-and-bots-for-plastic-surgeons-practices/#:~:text=%2A%20Aesthetics%20AI%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20AI,analysis%20tool%C2%A0for%C2%A0tailoring%20aesthetic%20treatments)
    as context for what's being emulated with open-source tools.

[\[1\]](https://medium.com/pythons-gurus/what-is-the-best-face-detector-ab650d8c1225#:~:text=RetinaFace%20has%20a%20reputation%20for,results%20back%20up%20that%20reputation)
[\[3\]](https://medium.com/pythons-gurus/what-is-the-best-face-detector-ab650d8c1225#:~:text=YuNet%20was%20developed%20with%20performance,enough%20for%20the%20larger%20models)
[\[4\]](https://medium.com/pythons-gurus/what-is-the-best-face-detector-ab650d8c1225#:~:text=compared%20to%20the%2027%2C293%2C600%20that,enough%20for%20the%20larger%20models)
What's the Best Face Detector?. Comparing Dlib, OpenCV, MTCNN, and... \|
by Amos Stailey-Young \| Python's Gurus \| Medium

<https://medium.com/pythons-gurus/what-is-the-best-face-detector-ab650d8c1225>

[\[2\]](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-3D-facial-surface-of-468-points-in-MediaPipe-Face-Mesh_fig4_367301766#:~:text=The%203D%20facial%20surface%20of,the%20need%20for%20a)
The 3D facial surface of 468 points in MediaPipe Face Mesh

<https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-3D-facial-surface-of-468-points-in-MediaPipe-Face-Mesh_fig4_367301766>

[\[5\]](https://specialistpracticeexcellence.com.au/blog/best-ai-tools-agents-and-bots-for-plastic-surgeons-practices/#:~:text=%2A%20Aesthetics%20AI%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20AI,analysis%20tool%C2%A0for%C2%A0tailoring%20aesthetic%20treatments)
Best AI Tools for Plastic Surgeons & Plastics Practices \| SPE

<https://specialistpracticeexcellence.com.au/blog/best-ai-tools-agents-and-bots-for-plastic-surgeons-practices/>

[\[6\]](https://github.com/GauravSharma0560/face-symmetry#:~:text=GauravSharma0560%2Fface,feature%20will%20be%20printed)
GauravSharma0560/face-symmetry - GitHub

<https://github.com/GauravSharma0560/face-symmetry>
